Include more information on Restriction (#1140)
jakartaee/data: spec/src/main/asciidoc/repository.asciidoc

NOTE: The behavior of a query method when the method is called with a null argument is not defined by this specification, and is not portable between Jakarta Data providers.

==== Restriction parameters

The `Restriction<T>` type is a special parameter used to dynamically construct queries in a fluent and type-safe manner. Valid as parameters to methods that perform queries, such as methods annotated `@Find` or `@Delete`, restrictions allow the application to define additional conditions programmatically, often using a generated metamodel class (see <<metamodel-java-processor>>).

When using `Restriction<T>` in repository methods:

- The use of `Restriction<T>` is only considered valid in portable applications when used as a parameter to methods annotated with `@Find`, `@Delete`, or `@Query`. Methods using `Restriction<T>` without one of these annotations are not covered by the specification. Jakarta Data providers may reject such methods by throwing an `UnsupportedOperationException`, or they may choose to support them as vendor-specific extensions.

> - The filtering that is defined by the `@Query` annotation or parameters of the method that is annotated `@Find` or `@Delete` is combined with the additional filtering specified by the `Restriction<T>` parameter such that matching entities must satisfy both.

Reviewer: Does this exactly reflect language we have elsewhere for `Sort` and `Order`?

Reviewer 2: > Does this exactly reflect language we have elsewhere for `Sort` and `Order`?

This is a good point.  `@Query` has the following documentation, which means it can only be used with `Sort`, `Order`, and `@OrderBy` when the query does not include an `ORDER.BY` clause,

```
     * <p>If the annotated repository method accepts other forms of sorting
     * (such as a parameter of type {@link Sort}), it is the responsibility of
     * the application programmer to compose the query so that an
     * {@code ORDER BY} clause can be validly appended to the text of the
     * query.</p>
```

Equivalent language would mean that `Restriction` can only be used with `@Query` when the query does not contain a `WHERE` clause.  This would not be very useful, so we will need to think more about whether the consistency is important, or if possibly `Restriction` shouldn't be required to work with `@Query` at all.

Reviewer 2: > IMHO: In this case, it does make sense as an exception.

I would not say as an exception.  There will be many cases where a more complex query is needed that requires query language and the application also would like to be able to add restrictions at run time.  To make it work, a Data Provider will need to be aware of the beginning and end of the WHERE clause within a query.  But I think providers already needed to have that awareness anyway for the sake of cursor-based pagination.

Reviewer: AFAICT it's not very hard to add additional restrictions to a JDQL query, given that JDQL doesn't have subqueries. For full JPQL it might be somewhat harder, but of course the spec wouldn't require it for full JPQL.

Author: @gavinking @njr-11 
I've created this change:

https://github.com/jakartaee/data/pull/1140/commits/d233ac4aa2ad4be02522f9243edaa8619397082d

Reviewer 2: > I've created this change:
> 
> [d233ac4](https://github.com/jakartaee/data/commit/d233ac4aa2ad4be02522f9243edaa8619397082d)

I don't think it is necessary to include this sort of language.  It sounds like we are borderline declaring optional features. It is already assumed that vendors can do whatever they want outside of the spec, and they will document that themselves in their own products rather than the spec needing to.

NOTE: The behavior of a query method when the method is called with a null argument is not defined by this specification, and is not portable between Jakarta Data providers.

==== Restriction parameters

The `Restriction<T>` type is a special parameter used to dynamically construct queries in a fluent and type-safe manner. Valid as parameters to methods that perform queries, such as methods annotated `@Find` or `@Delete`, restrictions allow the application to define additional conditions programmatically, often using a generated metamodel class (see <<metamodel-java-processor>>).

When using `Restriction<T>` in repository methods:

- The method *must* be annotated with either `@Find` or `@Query`. Without one of these annotations, the use of `Restriction<T>` is *not valid* and results in a `MappingException`.
- When `@Find` or `@Query` is present, `Restriction<T>` can appear in *any position* in the parameter list. In these cases, the `Restriction<T>` provides the full query logic programmatically, and any query derivation from the method name is ignored.

For example:

[source,java]
----

> @Query("WHERE (product.numAvailable > 0)")
> List<Product> search(Restriction<Product> restriction, Order<Product> order);
> 
> @Find
> Page<Product> findAvailable(Restriction<Product> restriction, PageRequest pageRequest);

Reviewer 2: I think you mixed these up.  The Query value of one matches the name of the other. And the one with pagination lacks an order, which is a requirement of pagination.
```suggestion
@Find
List<Product> search(Restriction<Product> restriction);

@Query("WHERE (product.numAvailable > 0)")
Page<Product> findAvailable(Restriction<Product> restriction, PageRequest pageRequest, Order<Product> order);
```

----

> The following is *invalid* and will throw a `MappingException`:

Reviewer 2: Now that you've decided Query by Method Name won't support Restriction, there are two possible errors that could be raised by the method.  MappingException for the lack of a parameter for the name.  UnsupportedOperationException for the attempt to supply Restriction to a method where it is not allowed. I don't think we can tell the Data Provider to choose one over the other. Either error would be valid.

```suggestion
The following is *invalid* because the method does not follow the Query by Method Name pattern of supplying a parameter per condition defined by the method name, nor does the method have an annotation that allows a `Restriction` parameter to be used.
```

[source,java]
----
List<Product> findByName(Restriction<Product> restriction);
----

> In both cases, Restriction<T> must not be used with lifecycle annotations such as @Save, @Insert, @Update, or @Delete.

Reviewer 2: To avoid confusion over Delete, which is sometimes a lifecycle method and sometimes performs a delete query depending on the parameter.
```suggestion
In both cases, Restriction<T> must not be used with lifecycle methods.
```

The example below shows a repository method that accepts a restriction to filter `Product` entities:

[source,java]
----
@Repository
public interface ProductRepository {
   @Find
   List<Product> search(@By(_Product.NAME) name, Restriction<Product> restriction);

   @Find
   List<Product> search(Restriction<Product> restriction);
}
...
List<Product> redPencils = products.search("pencil", _Product.color.equalTo(Color.RED));
List<Product> expensivePencils = products.search("pencil", _Product.price.greaterThan(BigDecimal.TEN));

> List<Product> expensivePencils = products.search(_Product.price.greaterThan(BigDecimal.TEN));

Reviewer 2: Avoid confusion because this query did not specify the product name of "pencil"
```suggestion
List<Product> expensiveItems = products.search(_Product.price.greaterThan(BigDecimal.TEN));
```

----

To combine multiple conditions, use the static methods `Restrict.all(...)` or `Restrict.any(...)`. These allow you to express conjunctions (AND) or disjunctions (OR) in a fluent way:

[source,java]
----
List<String> expensiveRedPencils = products.search(
    "pencil",
    Restrict.all(
        _Product.color.equalTo(Color.RED),
        _Product.price.greaterThan(BigDecimal.TEN)
    )
);
----

Valid method signatures include:

[source,java]
----
public interface ProductRepository {

>     List<Product> search(Restriction<Product> restriction);

Reviewer 2: Not a valid repository method without `@Find`
```suggestion
    @Find
    List<Product> search(Restriction<Product> restriction);
```

NOTE: The behavior of a query method when the method is called with a null argument is not defined by this specification, and is not portable between Jakarta Data providers.

==== Restriction parameters

The `Restriction<T>` type is a special parameter used to dynamically construct queries in a fluent and type-safe manner. Valid as parameters to methods that perform queries, such as methods annotated `@Find` or `@Delete`, restrictions allow the application to define additional conditions programmatically, often using a generated metamodel class (see <<metamodel-java-processor>>).

When using `Restriction<T>` in repository methods:

> - The method *must* be annotated with either `@Find`, '@Delete', or `@Query`. Without one of these annotations, the use of `Restriction<T>` is *not valid* and results in an `UnsupportedException`.

Reviewer: This is not correct.

Author: We use this week's meeting to discuss this point.

To confirm, the key point here is the portability in this scenario, right?

```java
List<Product> findByName(Restriction<Product>  restriction);
```

Once the restriction is the first parameter, it should overwrite the method query to use the restriction instead.

Reviewer: The point is that the specification does not say what happens in this case, because there might be some other annotation on that method which the specification doesn't know about, but which the Jakarta Data provider _does_. We have defined annotations like `@Find`, `@Delete`, or `@Query` as canonical representatives of open-ended sets of such "query" or "lifecycle" annotations, to allow for extension by implementations.

For example, Hibernate Data Repositories supports an `@SQL` annotation for queries written in native SQL. `@SQL` query methods don't support `Restriction`s, but the specification can't possibly know that.

Look, I've been trying to say lots of times that the spec needs to treat `Restriction` as a variation on `Order`. If the spec doesn't make a certain statement about `Order`, then it shouldn't make it about `Restriction` either. We want to avoid any divergence here.

Reviewer: Just want to clarify that my response is does not contradict Nathan's, even if they seem to be saying different things.

Author: @njr-11, that is not the focus; my point is more about the limitation, as Gavin said.

Given this sentence, this is wrong. 

```java
//hope this one is better, but please, ignore the method name right now!
List<Product> search(Restriction<Product>  restriction);
```

The provider could generate its annotation and behavior, as Gavin mentioned:

```java
@SQL(" any query here")
List<Product> search(Restriction<Product>  restriction);
```

By specification, this is invalid because it does not contain the required annotations: `@Find`, ' @Delete', or `@Query`.

On JNoSQL, we also have specializations that only make sense to NoSQL, such as, `CQL`, `Cypher`

Hope I make myself clear.
